The AGM-176 Griffin is a lightweight, precision-guided munition developed by Raytheon. It can be launched from the ground or air as a rocket-powered missile or dropped from the air as a guided bomb. It carries a relatively small warhead, and was designed to be a precision low-collateral damage weapon for irregular warfare. It has been used in combat by the United States military during the War in Afghanistan. ==Development== Raytheon developed the Griffin as a low-cost modular system, using components from earlier projects, including the FGM-148 Javelin and the AIM-9X Sidewinder. It was originally designed to be launched from the US Special Operations Command's MC-130W Dragon Spear gunship and can be guided either by a semi-active laser seeker or with GPS. Its precision combined with a relatively small 5.9 kg warhead reduces collateral damage.Smaller, Cheaper, Lighter William Matthews, Defense News, 31 May 2010 The munition comes in two versions. Griffin A is an unpowered precision munition that can be dropped from a rear cargo door or a door-mounted launcher that can drop while the cabin is pressurized. Weighing 15 kg and measuring 1.1 meters in length, it is launched from a 10-tube "Gunslinger" launcher that fits on the rear ramp of a Marine KC-130 tanker/transport or both the US Air Force AC-130W "Stinger II" and AC-130J "Ghostrider" gunship variants. Griffin Block II B is a short-range, rocket- powered air-to-surface or surface-to-surface missile that can be fired from UAVs as well as helicopters, attack aircraft, U.S. Air Force AC-130W gunships, and Marine Corps KC-130J tankers."Who paid Raytheon to develop the Griffin missile for Predator UAVs?" Intelfusion. 15 June 2008 The missile's folding fins allow it to be launched from a 140 mm tube. It can be set to engage the target with height of burst, point detonation or fuze delay. The U.S. Navy has tested the Griffin as a shipboard missile guided by laser at fast-moving small boats; they planned to use it on the Littoral Combat Ships. The missile version is less than half the weight of a Hellfire round and includes a 5.9 kg warhead. It has a range of 15 km when air-launched, or 5.5 km when launched from the surface. It has been fired from the U.S. Army Remote weapon station, multi-round Wedge Launcher, Smart Launcher and Kiowa Warrior manned helicopters. The missile is smaller than the Hellfire typically used by armed UAVs, which reduces the potential for collateral damage. The Griffin missile and launch assembly is also lighter than the Hellfire, allowing more to be mounted on the Predator.Efforts Are Underway to Arm Small UAVs Aviation Week. 17 October 2008 Three Griffins can be carried in place of one Hellfire. In 70 months of production from 2008 to early February 2014, Raytheon delivered 2,000 Griffin missiles.Raytheon Marks Delivery of 2000th Griffin Missile – Deagel.com, 5 February 2014 In late February 2014, Raytheon demonstrated the improved Griffin Block III missile, hitting static and moving targets. The Block III includes an improved semi-active laser seeker with better electronics and signal processing and a new Multi-Effects Warhead System to maximize lethality against different targets.Raytheon Demonstrates Griffin Block III Missile – Deagel.com, 19 February 2014 ===Naval use=== Raytheon developed an extended-range version of the Griffin for integration onto Littoral Combat Ships. The Sea Griffin has a new motor and guidance system to increase its firing range from an LCS. Raytheon faced competition in equipping the LCS with a missile, as the Navy looked for other vendors. Competition came from MBDA with the Sea Spear version of its Brimstone missile. Both missiles are intended to give the LCS protection from small boat swarm attacks.Raytheon Working on Extending Range of Griffin Missile for LCS – Defensenews.com, 23 June 2013 The Navy instead selected the AGM-114L Hellfire to equip the LCS. The decision was made from the ship's use of the Saab's Sea Giraffe radar. While each Griffin requires a semi-active laser to paint a target, so a volley of them can only engage one target at a time, the Longbow Hellfire missiles can use the ship's and their own millimeter wave radar to separately track and engage multiple targets at the same time.Navy Axes Griffin Missile In Favor of Longbow Hellfire for LCS – News.USNI.org, 9 April 2014 thumb| fires a BGM-176B missile in June 2015. The MK-60 Patrol Coastal Griffin Missile System achieved initial operational capability (IOC) with the U.S. Navy in March 2014, which is intended to provide protection for vessels in littoral areas against swarm boat attacks and other threats. The MK-60 includes the Griffin missile, a laser targeting system, a Navy-designed launcher, and a battle management system.US Navy declares IOC for MK-60 Griffin missile system – Shephardmedia.com, 25 March 2014 Each Mk-60 can launch four missiles, and a patrol ship has two MK-60 launchers on board. The U.S. Navy began installing Griffin missiles on Patrol Craft in 2013; as of May 2014, four were outfitted with Griffin missile systems, with plans to equip ten PCs by 2016. When mounted on a ship, the missile is designated the BGM-176B. Arming PCs with Griffin missiles adds a layer of defense to the ships beyond the range of their 25 mm gun mounts, out to , and also provides 360-degree coverage; the missiles' thrust-vectoring engines can move the missile to its target even when launched vertically. Installation onto a PC involves adding the launcher and weapons control system, the BRITE Star II sensor/laser designator, and the Griffin B Block II missile in a process taking one month.Raytheon Developing Longer-Range Griffin Missile – Sea Power magazine, 14 April 2014Navy Test- Fires Griffin Missiles from PC Boats – Defensetech.org, 8 May 2014 Raytheon is continuing to fund the development of the Sea Griffin to extend the missile's range. The Sea Griffin will use a dual-mode seeker with an imaging infrared seeker and semi-active laser guidance, and a data-link to track multiple threats simultaneously and give it a fire-and-forget capability. The new seeker and an extended-range rocket motor, which will add 9.1 kg, will increase the range of the Sea Griffin to 15 km. In tests, the Sea Griffin's new imaging infrared (IIR) seeker has streamed video back to operators through the data-link to provide verification before the missile strikes the target.SeaGriffin Completes Guided Flight Test with Dual-mode Seeker – Deagel.com, 14 July 2014 Its In-Flight Target Update (IFTU) capability allows it to be redirected to a new target in mid-flight, a vital feature against swarming small boats moving between friendly forces and neutral shipping. The Sea Griffin has been renamed the Griffin C.Raytheon Griffin C flight tests demonstrate in-flight retargeting capability - Marketwatch.com, 28 October 2014 ==Variants== ==Launch platforms== * MQ-1 Predator * MQ-9 Reaper * A-29 Super Tucano * KC-130J Harvest HAWK * MC-130W Dragon Spear * Cyclone-class patrol ship * AC-130J "Ghostrider" * AC-130W "Stinger II" * V-22 OspreyOsprey Fires Guided Rockets And Missiles In New Trials - Aviationweek.com, 8 December 2014 ==Users== * == References == ==External links== * Griffin Air Launch Applications * Griffin Surface Launch Applications AGM176 AGM-176 Category:Military equipment introduced in the 2000s