Agrostis scabra is a common species of grass known by the common names hair grass, rough bent, rough bent grass, winter bent grass, and ticklegrass. page 210 A tumbleweed, page 479 it is a bunchgrass native to Asia and much of North America, and widely known elsewhere as an introduced species. ==Distribution== It occurs in most of the United States except parts of the Southeast and most of Canada except for the farthest northern regions. It can be found in Mexico and California, and across Alaska to far eastern Asia as far south as Korea.Grass Manual Treatment It is resident in a great variety of habitats, from warm coastal valleys to the alpine climate of high mountain ranges. It has been observed on cliffs, in forests, at forest edges, in meadows and fields, and at the shores of rivers and lakes. ==Description== Agrostis scabra is a perennial bunchgrass growing mainly upright in form to heights around 75 centimeters. The leaves are rough with tiny hairs and up to about 14 centimeters long. The inflorescence is a wide open array of spreading, thready branches bearing spikelets each a few millimeters long. ==Uses== The tolerance of this grass to alpine climates makes it a good plant to use in revegetating disturbed land in such regions. It's known to respond to burning with increased growth. It is known to spring up on sites where few other plants can grow, such as abandoned coal mines and soils polluted with sulfur, copper, and nickel. Prior to flowering, cattle, sheep, and horses readily consume it; it is also occasionally consumed by wild animals and after flowering by livestock. ==References== ==External links== * Jepson Manual Treatment — Agrostis scabra * scabra Category:Bunchgrasses of North America Category:Bunchgrasses of Asia Category:Grasses of the United States Category:Grasses of Mexico Category:Grasses of Canada Category:Native grasses of California Category:Native grasses of the Great Plains region Category:Native grasses of Texas Category:Grasses of Alabama Category:Flora of Western Canada Category:Flora of the Canadian Prairies Category:Flora of Eastern Canada Category:Flora of the Western United States Category:Flora of the Eastern United States Category:Flora of Central Mexico Category:Flora of Northeastern Mexico Category:Flora of Northwestern Mexico Category:Flora of the Sierra Nevada (United States) Category:Flora of the Rocky Mountains Category:Flora of Northeast Asia Category:Flora of Siberia Category:Flora of Japan Category:Tumbleweeds Category:Alpine flora