Aceratherium (Greek: "without (a) horn" (keratos), "beast" (therion)) was a genus of rhinoceros of the subfamily Aceratheriinae that lived in Eurasia during the Miocene. ==Taxonomy== Aceratherium was coined by Kaup (1832) for "Rhinoceros" incisivum Cuvier, 1822 on the basis of the similarity of two skulls from Eppelsheim, Germany to the holotype incisor tooth from Weisenau in dental structure. However, the tooth from Weisenau has been recognized as belonging to a member of Teleoceratini, although the name Aceratherium has been widely used for the Eppelsheim skulls.Giaourtsakis, I. X., and K. Heissig. 2004. On the nomenclatural status of Aceratherium incisivum (Rhinocerotidae, Mammalia); pp. 314–317 in A. A. Chatzipetros and S. B. Pavlides (eds.), Proceedings of 5th International Symposium on Eastern Mediterranean Geology, Volume1, 14–20 April 2004, Thessaloniki, Greece. Aristotle University, Thessaloniki. Traditionally, many species have been referred to Aceratherium on the basis of them being hornless, turning the genus into a wastebasket. Revisions over the years have removed most species to the point that there are now only three valid species generally recognized (A. incisivum, A. depereti, and A. porpani). ==Description== Aceratherium reached in length, a height of about and a weight of nearly 1 ton.Esperanza Cerdeño and Begoña Sánchez: Intraspecific variation and evolutionary trends of Alicornops simorrense (Rhinocerotidae) in Spain. The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters Zoologica Scripta 29 (4. October), 2000, p. 275–305 Its brachyodont dentition suggest it was a browser which fed on leaves and soft vegetables. It had fairly long limbs compared to other Aceratheriinae, and was proportioned similar to a tapir. Males had tusk-like incisors that were much larger than those of the females. ==References== Category:Miocene rhinoceroses Category:Miocene mammals of Asia Category:Miocene mammals of Europe Category:Cenozoic animals of Asia Category:Cenozoic mammals of Europe Category:Miocene genus extinctions