Adam Douglas Driver (born November 19, 1983) is an American actor. Recognized for his collaborations with auteur filmmakers, he is the recipient of various accolades, including nominations for two Academy Awards, four Primetime Emmy Awards and a Tony Award. Driver made his Broadway debut in Mrs. Warren's Profession (2010) and subsequently appeared in Man and Boy (2011). He rose to prominence with a supporting role in the HBO series Girls (2012–2017), for which he received three consecutive Primetime Emmy nominations. He began his film career in supporting roles in Steven Spielberg's Lincoln (2012), Noah Baumbach's Frances Ha (2012), and the Coen brothers' Inside Llewyn Davis (2013). He won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor for a leading role in Hungry Hearts (2014). Driver gained wider recognition for playing Kylo Ren in the Star Wars sequel trilogy (2015–2019). He played a poet in Jim Jarmusch's Paterson (2016), and had supporting roles in Martin Scorsese's religious epic Silence (2016) and Steven Soderbergh's heist comedy Logan Lucky (2017). In 2019, he returned to the stage in the Broadway revival of Burn This, for which he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play. He garnered consecutive Academy Award nominations: Best Supporting Actor for Spike Lee's BlacKkKlansman (2018) and Best Actor for Noah Baumbach's Marriage Story (2019). He has since starred in Ridley Scott's period films, The Last Duel and House of Gucci (both 2021), and Baumbach's satire White Noise (2022). Driver is a veteran of the U.S. Marine Corps. He is also the founder of Arts in the Armed Forces, a non-profit that provides free arts programming to American active-duty service members, veterans, military support staff, and their families worldwide. ==Early life== Driver was born on November 19, 1983, in San Diego, California, the son of Nancy Wright (née Needham), a paralegal, and Joe Douglas Driver. He has Dutch, English, German, Irish and Scottish ancestry. His father's family is from Arkansas and his mother's family is from Indiana. His stepfather, Rodney G. Wright, is a minister at a Baptist church. When Driver was seven years old, he moved with his older sister and mother to his mother's hometown Mishawaka, Indiana, where he graduated from Mishawaka High School in 2001. Driver was raised Baptist, and sang in the choir at church. Driver has described his teenage self as a "misfit"; he told M Magazine that he climbed radio towers, set objects on fire, and co-founded a fight club with friends, inspired by the 1999 film Fight Club. After high school, he worked as a door-to-door salesman selling Kirby vacuum cleaners and as a telemarketer for a basement waterproofing company and Ben Franklin Construction. He applied to the Juilliard School for drama but was not accepted. Shortly after the September 11 attacks, Driver enlisted in the United States Marine Corps. He was assigned to Weapons Company, 1st Battalion, 1st Marines as an 81mm mortar man. He served for two years and eight months before fracturing his sternum while mountain biking. He was medically discharged with the rank of Lance Corporal. Subsequently, Driver attended the University of Indianapolis for a year before auditioning again for Juilliard, this time succeeding. He got the news he was accepted while at work at the Target Distribution Center in Indianapolis. Driver has said that his classmates saw him as an intimidating and volatile figure, and he struggled to fit into a lifestyle so different from the Marines. He was a member of the Drama Division's Group 38 from 2005 to 2009, where he met his future wife, Joanne Tucker. He graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts in 2009. == Career == ===2009–2014: Early work === After graduating from Juilliard, Driver moved to New York City, appearing in both Broadway and off-Broadway productions. Like many aspiring actors, he occasionally worked as a busboy and waiter. Driver appeared in several television shows and short films. He played a repentant witness and reluctant accomplice to an unsolved assault in the final episode of the television series The Unusuals. He made his film debut in Clint Eastwood's biographical film J. Edgar. In 2012, Driver was cast in the HBO comedy-drama series Girls, as the emotionally unstable boyfriend of a writer (Lena Dunham). He received three nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series for his role. The same year, Driver played supporting roles in two critically acclaimed films, as telegraph and cipher officer Samuel Beckwith in Steven Spielberg's historical drama Lincoln, and Lev Shapiro in Noah Baumbach's comedy-drama Frances Ha. He starred in the drama Not Waving But Drowning and the romantic-comedy Gayby. He garnered major off-Broadway recognition for playing Cliff, a working-class Welsh houseguest in Look Back in Anger, winning the Lucille Lortel Award for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Play. In 2013, Driver appeared in the drama Bluebird and the romantic-comedy What If. He played a musician in the Coen Brothers' black comedy Inside Llewyn Davis, and photographer Rick Smolan in the drama Tracks. In 2014, he played a despairing father in the drama Hungry Hearts, an aspiring filmmaker in Noah Baumbach's comedy While We're Young, and the black sheep of a dysfunctional Jewish family in the comedy-drama This Is Where I Leave You. For his performance in Hungry Hearts, Driver won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor at the 71st Venice International Film Festival. For Vogues September 2013 issue, Driver appeared in an editorial alongside Canadian model Daria Werbowy set in Ireland, photographed by Annie Leibovitz. ===2015–present: Worldwide recognition=== In early 2014, Driver was cast as villain Kylo Ren in Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015). It was released on December 18, 2015, to commercial and critical success. He reprised the role in The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019). His performance was positively received, with his character lauded as the best in the series: David Edelstein of Vulture wrote, "the core of The Last Jedi — of this whole trilogy, it seems — is Driver's Kylo Ren, who ranks with cinema's most fascinating human monsters." Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian highlighted Driver's performance in his review of The Force Awakens, calling him "gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious... very suited to Kylo Ren's fastidious and amused contempt for his enemies' weakness and compassion." Driver played a supporting role in Jeff Nichols' sci-fi thriller Midnight Special, which was released on March 18, 2016. He played a 17th-century Portuguese Jesuit priest in Martin Scorsese's historical film Silence (2016). While filming, Driver lost almost 50 pounds. In Jim Jarmusch's drama film Paterson, Driver played the eponymous bus driver and poetry writer. It premiered at the 69th Cannes Film Festival and was released on December 28, 2016. Driver's performance was acclaimed and he received multiple nominations for Best Actor from critics' associations, winning several, including the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote "Driver's indelibly moving portrayal is so lived-in and lyrical you hardly recognize it as acting." Paterson was included in many critics' top ten lists of best films of 2016. In 2017, Driver made a cameo in Noah Baumbach's The Meyerowitz Stories, making his third appearance in one of their films. It premiered at the 70th Cannes Film Festival and was released on October 13, 2017. He played Clyde, a one-armed Iraq War veteran, in Steven Soderbergh's Logan Lucky, which was released on August 18, 2017. Driver played a Jewish police detective, who infiltrates the Ku Klux Klan in Spike Lee's comedy-drama BlacKkKlansman. It premiered at 71st Cannes Film Festival and was released on August 10, 2018. He received critical acclaim for his performance in the film and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor. Driver played Toby Grummett in Terry Gilliam's adventure-comedy film The Man Who Killed Don Quixote, which also premiered at Cannes. In 2019, Driver played Daniel J. Jones in Scott Z. Burns' political drama The Report, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in Utah. He returned to Broadway to play Pale against Keri Russell in Michael Mayer's directed-production of Lanford Wilson's Burn This, receiving acclaim for his explosive performance and a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play. He was part of the ensemble cast of Jim Jarmusch's zombie comedy film The Dead Don't Die, which premiered at the 72nd Cannes Film Festival and was released on June 14, 2019. That same year, Driver starred opposite Scarlett Johansson in Noah Baumbach's Marriage Story, which premiered at the 76th Venice International Film Festival. Reviewing the film in The Hollywood Reporter, critic Jon Frosch noted that Driver "delivers a brilliantly inhabited and shaded portrait" of a man undergoing a divorce. For his performance, he received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. In 2020, Driver became the subject of a running gag on Last Week Tonight with John Oliver, in which Oliver expressed several strange masochistic fantasies about Driver, referencing his muscular build and masculine appearance. Driver eventually appeared on the final episode of the season and "demanded an apology". In 2021, he went viral for his shirtless appearance in the advertising campaign for Burberry's masculine fragrance Hero. Driver again returned for the advertising campaign for the eau de parfum concentration of Hero in 2022. In 2021, Driver starred in Leos Carax's long-awaited musical drama film Annette, which premiered at the 74th Cannes Film Festival. He had a leading role in Ridley Scott's historical drama The Last Duel, along with the biopic crime film House of Gucci, which covers the assassination of Maurizio Gucci, and was also directed by Scott. Equally praised by critics and directors, Driver's acting has a unique signature style that displays skittish, unpredictable physicality with full-bodied enthusiasm like Denis Lavant and Buster Keaton. In 2022, Driver starred in the apocalyptic black comedy film White Noise, which marks his fifth collaboration with Baumbach. Driver starred in the science fiction film 65 and is scheduled to star in Jeff Nichols' historical film Yankee Commandante. Driver played Enzo Ferrari in Michael Mann's biopic film Ferrari. In May 2022, he was cast in Francis Ford Coppola's film Megalopolis. In May 2023, it was announced that Driver would be an honorary starter for the 107th running of the Indianapolis 500 auto race. ==Personal life== Driver married his longtime partner Joanne Tucker in June 2013. Tucker is the granddaughter of Bermudian politician Henry Tucker. The couple has a son, whose birth they kept private from the press for two years. They live in Brooklyn Heights with their son and dog. Driver is the founder of Arts in the Armed Forces (AITAF), a non-profit that performs theatre for all branches of the military in the United States and abroad. Driver has said on multiple occasions that he disliked watching or listening to his own performances. During a radio interview with NPR's Fresh Air, he chose not to continue with the interview after the host played a clip from Marriage Story. The executive producer of the radio show later claimed that Driver was warned to remove his headphones before the clip played, and that the show did something similar with Driver during a 2015 interview. During the same interview, Driver stated he disliked watching or listening to his acting work. He says his usual technique is to leave the theatre and, "then I go back, and when the lights come up, I stand up I pretend that I was there the whole time." ==Filmography== ===Film=== Key Denotes productions that have not yet been released Year Title Role Notes 2011 J. Edgar Walter Lyle 2012 Gayby Neil 2012 Not Waving But Drowning Adam 2012 Frances Ha Lev Shapiro 2012 Lincoln Samuel Beckwith 2013 Bluebird Walter 2013 Inside Llewyn Davis Al Cody 2013 Tracks Rick Smolan 2013 What If Allan 2014 Hungry Hearts Jude 2014 While We're Young Jamie Massey 2014 This Is Where I Leave You Phillip Altman 2015 Star Wars: The Force Awakens Kylo Ren 2016 Midnight Special Paul Sevier 2016 Paterson Paterson 2016 Silence Father Francisco Garupe 2017 The Meyerowitz Stories Randy 2017 Logan Lucky Clyde Logan 2017 Star Wars: The Last Jedi Kylo Ren 2018 BlacKkKlansman Det. Philip "Flip" Zimmerman 2018 The Man Who Killed Don Quixote Toby Grummett 2019 The Report Daniel J. Jones 2019 The Dead Don't Die Officer Ronald Peterson 2019 Marriage Story Charlie Barber 2019 Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker Ben Solo / Kylo Ren 2021 Annette Henry McHenry Also producer The Last Duel Jacques Le Gris House of Gucci Maurizio Gucci 2022 White Noise Jack Gladney 2023 65 Commander Mills 2023 Ferrari Enzo Ferrari Post-production 2024 Megalopolis Caesar Post-production ===Television=== Year Title Role Notes 2009 The Wonderful Maladys Zed Unaired pilot; filmed in May 2009 The Unusuals Will Slansky Episode: "The E.I.D." 2010 Law & Order Robby Vickery Episode: "Brilliant Disguise" You Don't Know Jack Glen Stetson Television film 2012 Law & Order: Special Victims Unit Jason Roberts Episode: "Theatre Tricks" 2012–2017 Girls Adam Sackler 49 episodes 2015 The Simpsons Adam Sackler (voice) Episode: "Every Man's Dream" 2016–2020 Saturday Night Live Himself (host) 3 episodes 2017 Bob's Burgers Art the Artist (voice) Two- part episode: "The Bleakening" 2018 Joseph Pulitzer: Voice of the People Narrator (voice) Television documentary ===Theatre=== Year Title Role Venue Production type 2009 Slipping Chris Rattlestick Playwrights Theater Off- Broadway 2009 The Retributionists Dov Kaplinsky Playwrights Horizons Off- Broadway 2010 Little Doc Ric Rattlestick Playwrights Theater Off-Broadway 2010 The Forest Bulanov East 13th Street Theatre Off-Broadway 2010 Mrs. Warren's Profession Frank Gardner American Airlines Theatre Broadway 2010–2011 Angels in America Louis Ironson Peter Norton Space Off-Broadway 2011 Man and Boy Basil Anthony American Airlines Theatre Broadway 2012 Look Back in Anger Cliff Lewis Laura Pels Theatre Off-Broadway 2019 Burn This Pale Hudson Theatre Broadway ===Video games=== Year Title Voice role 2015 Disney Infinity 3.0 Kylo Ren 2016 Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens ===Theme park attractions=== Year Title Role Venue 2019, 2020 Star Wars: Rise of the Resistance Kylo Ren Disney's Hollywood Studios / Disneyland ==Awards and nominations== For his work on television, Driver has received four Primetime Emmy Award nominations. He received three nominations for his performance in Girls from 2013, 2014, and 2015, in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series category. In 2020, he also received a nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for his guest hosting role on Saturday Night Live. For his work in film, he has been nominated twice for an Academy Award, for his performances in Spike Lee's BlacKkKlansman (2018), and Noah Baumbach's Marriage Story (2019). He also received British Academy Film Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award (SAG) nominations for those films as well. He also received a SAG Award nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture as a part of the ensemble of Steven Spielberg's Lincoln. In 2019 he received a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Play for his performance in Burn This at the 73rd Tony Awards. ==References== ==External links== * * * * * * * Adam Driver: Theatre Credits on Broadwayworld.com Category:Living people Category:1983 births Category:21st-century American male actors Category:American male film actors Category:American male stage actors Category:American male television actors Category:American male voice actors Category:American people of Dutch descent Category:American people of English descent Category:American people of German descent Category:American people of Irish descent Category:American people of Scottish descent Category:Best Actor AACTA International Award winners Category:Juilliard School alumni Category:Male actors from California Category:Male actors from Indiana Category:People from Brooklyn Heights Category:People from Mishawaka, Indiana Category:People from San Diego Category:United States Marines Category:University of Indianapolis alumni Category:Volpi Cup for Best Actor winners