Abraham "Bambol" Ng Tolentino (born February 23, 1964) is a Filipino politician who currently serves as the Mayor of Tagaytay and President of the Philippine Olympic Committee. He previously served as representative of Cavite's 8th district from 2019 to 2022 and the 7th district from 2013 to 2019. ==Early life and education== Abraham Tolentino was born on February 23, 1964. He is the youngest of the two sons of Atty. Isaac O. Tolentino, who was the longest-serving mayor of Tagaytay. He is the brother of Francis Tolentino, also a former mayor of Tagaytay and incumbent senator. Tolentino had his primary education at the St. Augustine School in Mendez, Cavite and his secondary education at the St. Anthony School in Malate, Manila. He earned his Bachelor of Science in Commerce (Major in Management) degree at San Beda College (now San Beda University) and his Master of Science in Fiscal Studies at the Lyceum of the Philippines University. Tolentino took an Executive Course on Leadership, Chaos, Conflict & Courage for the 21st Century at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University and Executive Course on National Security at the Institute for Extramural and Continuing Studies, National Defense College of the Philippines. ==Political career== In 1998, he was elected as City Councilor of Tagaytay and served until 2004. He ran for Mayor in 2004 and won; he was re-elected in 2007 and 2010. In 2013, he defeated Gilbert Remulla as Congressman of the newly-created 7th district of Cavite. He was re-elected in 2016 and in 2019, this time at the newly-created 8th district. His other positions include: * Member - Commission of Appointments * Vice Chairman - Committee of Agrarian Reform * Chairman - Committee of Agriculture and Food * Vice Chairman - Committee of National Defense * Vice Chairman - Committee of Rules and Resolutions Tolentino also serves as the President of the Philippine Olympic Committee since 2019. On July 10, 2020, Tolentino is one of the 70 representatives who voted to "yes" to deny the franchise renewal of ABS-CBN. On December 16, he was named as one of the Deputy Speakers of the House of Representatives. Tolentino, being term- limited as representative, ran for Mayor of Tagaytay in 2022 and won, running unopposed. ==Personal life== He is married to Dr. Agnes Delgado Tolentino, the incumbent vice mayor and former mayor of Tagaytay. They have three children. Their eldest daughter, Aniela Bianca, is the incumbent representative of the 8th district of Cavite. Their second daughter, Athena Bryana, is the incumbent vice governor of Cavite. He is a Past Grand Master of the Free & Accepted Masons of the Philippines. He also served as the Secretary-General of FIDE/World Chess Organization, President of ASEAN Chess Zone 3.3, Secretary- General of the National Chess Federation of the Philippines, and is currently the President of Philcycling. ==References== Category:1964 births Category:Filipino politicians of Chinese descent Category:Living people Category:PDP–Laban politicians Category:National Unity Party (Philippines) politicians Category:Liberal Party (Philippines) politicians Category:United Nationalist Alliance politicians Category:San Beda University alumni Category:Lyceum of the Philippines University alumni Category:Members of the House of Representatives of the Philippines from Cavite Category:Mayors of places in Cavite Category:People from Tagaytay Category:Filipino city and municipal councilors Category:Filipino Freemasons Category:Filipino sports executives and administrators