ABilly S. Jones-Hennin (born 1942) is an American LGBT rights activist based in Washington, D.C. == Early life and education == Jones was born in St. John's, Antigua. He was adopted at age 3 by American civil rights activists. As a teenager in the 1950s, he had participated in lunch counter sit-ins. After graduating from high school, he was briefly involved with the US Marine Corps. In college, he protested against the Vietnam War. In 1967 he graduated from Virginia State University. Later in life, he earned a Master's Degree in social work at Howard University. == Career == Jones-Hennin has worked as a qualitative researcher. == Activism == In 1978, Jones cofounded the National Coalition of Black Gays (NCBG) in Columbia, Maryland; the organization was the first national advocacy group of its kind for gay and lesbian African Americans. In 1979, he was the logistics coordinator the first March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights, and helped organize the National Third World LGBT Conference at Howard University. That same year, the NCBG organized the first delegation of gay people of color to meet with Presidential representatives, of which Jones was a member. Jones also founded the Gay Married Men's Association (GAMMA), co-founded the D.C. chapter of Black and White Men Together, and, in April 1978, founded the D.C. Coalition of Black Gays. In the 1980s, Jones was a founding member of the Langston Hughes-Eleanor Roosevelt Democratic Club, an alternative to the Gertrude Stein Club. Jones and his then-partner, Chris Hennin, worked with the Whitman-Walker Clinic during the HIV/AIDS crisis to develop healthcare programs, educate the public on the illness, and provide support to those diagnosed. In August 1989, he was made head of the Minority Aids Program in D.C. In 2007, Jones was the chair of the DC Mayor's LGBT Advisory Committee. Jones-Hennin has remained involved with activism and local politics, and has also spoken out about homophobia in healthcare in recent years. == Personal life == Jones realized he was attracted to men early in his life, and initially identified as gay, but chose to marry on the advice of his father. He and his wife, who lived in Columbia, Maryland, had three children, but they separated after seven years. He maintained joint custody of his children, who have remained supportive of him throughout his life. After the separation, Jones moved to Washington D.C. in 1977; it was in D.C. that he began identifying as bisexual. By 2022, he also identified as queer. In the late 1970s Jones met his partner and later husband, Chris Hennin, through the Gay Married Men's Association. The A in Jones-Hennin's first name comes from a godparent's initial; he chooses to capitalize the first two letters of his name. Jones changed his surname to Jones-Hennin in 2008. == References == Category:Living people Category:1942 births Category:20th-century African-American people Category:21st-century African-American people Category:Activists from Washington, D.C. Category:African-American activists Category:American LGBT rights activists Category:American people of Antigua and Barbuda descent Category:Bisexual men Category:Howard University alumni Category:LGBT African Americans Category:Virginia State University alumni