Abdolmalek Rigi ( ; also spelt Abdul-Malek Rigi or Abdulmalik Rigi) () ( – 20 June 2010) was the leader of Jundallah, a terrorist group based in the Sistan and Balochistan Province of southeast Iran. In 2010, he was captured and executed by the Iranian government. ==Early life and education== Born in 1979, Abdolmalek Rigi was from the Rigi tribe who are ethnic Baloch. Prior to founding Jundallah, while a teenager, Rigi was convicted of assault with a knife, for which he served time in prison. ==Alleged activities== Starting in 2007, there has been considerable controversy over their support and international ties. Jundallah is believed by many experts to be linked to Al- Qaeda. There are also claims that Jundallah has had contact with the U.S. government and receives funding from Baluchi Iranians abroad.Car bomb in Iran destroys a bus carrying Revolutionary Guards The New York Times Dan Rather's U.S. cable channel HDnet's television news magazine Dan Rather Reports, interviewed Rigi and showed a video of Rigi personally cutting off his brother in-law's head. In the same interview, Rigi described himself as "an Iranian" and denied that his goal was to form a separate Baluch state. He claimed that his goal was to "improve conditions for ethnic Baluchis", and that his group was "fighting exclusively for the rights of Sunni Muslims in Iran".HDNet Original Programming - Transcripts HDNet Original Programming - Dan Rather Reports According to a former hostage , Rigi never slept in one place for two consecutive nights and did not shake hands with other people without wearing gloves. He was also reported to emulate Al-Zarqawi in his conduct and videos of hostage executions. The Iranian newspaper Kayhan incorrectly reported on 7 April 2005 that Rigi had been killed in an operation on the border to Afghanistan. A video surfaced on 11 April 2005, showing Rigi alive. Rigi's brother Abdulhamid Rigi accused his brother of working with Americans against Iran. Iranian authorities claimed that Rigi had murdered an Iranian general and carried out terrorist attacks in Iran. These allegations led to his arrest in February 2010. ==2010 arrest== There are two conflicting versions of Rigi's arrest. According to the Iranian government, on 23 February 2010, Rigi was aboard a flight from Dubai, United Arab Emirates to Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, travelling with a forged Afghanistan passport. When the plane was crossing the Persian Gulf, Iranian fighter jets intercepted it. The Iranian jets ordered the pilot to land in Iranian territory and "a number of foreign passengers were forcibly removed." When the plane landed at Bandar Abbas International Airport, Iranian forces identified Rigi and arrested him. After his arrest, Iranian TV showed Rigi, with hands tied, being escorted by four masked Iranian commandos. ==Execution== On 20 June 2010, Iranian and international media reported that Rigi had been hanged in Evin Prison in Tehran. The Islamic Republic News Agency stated that the execution was carried out following a decision of the Tehran revolutionary tribunal. It quoted a court statement saying: "The head of the armed counter-revolutionary group in the east of the country was responsible for armed robbery, assassination attempts, armed attacks on the army and police and on ordinary people, and murder." His execution was described as a "severe blow" to Jundullah. Rigi was buried in Khavaran cemetery in southeast Tehran. An Iranian drama film, When the Moon Was Full, written and directed by Narges Abyar, was released in 2019. It is based on the story of Rigi's brother and sister-in-law. ==See also== * 2009 Zahedan explosion * 2010 Zahedan mosque bombings ==References== Category:1970s births Category:2010 deaths Category:Iranian Sunni Muslims Category:People executed by Iran by hanging Category:Terrorism in Iran Category:Baloch politicians Category:Sunni Islamists Category:Iranian criminals Category:21st- century executions by Iran Category:Executed Iranian people Category:Jundallah (Iran) Category:Iranian rebels Category:Baloch militants Category:People from Zahedan Category:Iranian expatriates in Pakistan Category:Leaders of Islamic terror groups Category:Iranian murderers Category:Inmates of Evin Prison Category:Jamia Uloom-ul-Islamia alumni